DHS texts become the latest Jan. 6 materials to go ‘missing’ Featured Shows MSNBC TV More Follow msnbc More Brands More Shows By Steve Benen The information we’ve learned about Donald Trump, his team, their efforts to overturn the election, and the Jan. 6 attack has been devastating. But it’s hard not to wonder how much worse the emerging picture would appear if some key details weren’t “missing.” For example, Secret Service text messages from Jan. 5 and Jan. 6 have apparently been erased under controversial circumstances that are now the subject of a criminal investigation. There are also questions surrounding gaps in the White House call logs. At last week’s Jan. 6 committee hearing, we learned the Presidential Daily Diary also “contains no information from the period between 1:21 p.m. and 4:03 p.m.” the day of the assault on the Capitol. One of my personal favorites was the reporting on then-White House Chief of Staff Mark Meadows literally setting fire to papers in his office after a meeting with a Republican congressman who was assisting with Team Trump’s anti-election schemes. Overnight, the list received an important new addition. The Washington Post reported: Text messages for President Donald Trump’s acting homeland security secretary Chad Wolf and acting deputy secretary Ken Cuccinelli are missing for a key period leading up to the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol, according to four people briefed on the matter and internal emails.  According to the reporting, which has not been independently verified by MSNBC or NBC News, Department of Homeland Security Inspector General Joseph Cuffari was notified in February that Wolf’s and Cuccinelli’s text messages were lost in a “reset” of their government phones. The Post added that the DHS watchdog “did not press the department leadership at that time to explain why they did not preserve these records, nor seek ways to recover the lost data.” He also failed to notify Congress. There’s a reason key congressional Democrats do not have confidence in the Trump-appointed inspector general — and do not want him involved in key elements of the larger investigation. In case this isn’t obvious, Wolf was already a controversial figure who was accused of politicizing his office. (It’s also worth emphasizing that while Trump appointed Wolf to serve as acting DHS secretary in November 2019, there’s ample reason to believe he served in the post illegally.) Meanwhile, Cuccinelli — who was a little too extreme to get confirmed by a Republican-led Senate, but whom the then-president appointed to a top DHS post anyway — was even more brazen about trying to push officials into pursuing a partisan agenda in line with the Trump White House’s wishes. The Post's report added, "The telephone and text communications of Wolf and Cuccinelli in the days leading up to Jan. 6 could have shed considerable light on Trump’s actions and plans. In the weeks before the attack on the Capitol, Trump had been pressuring both men to help him claim the 2020 election results were rigged and even to seize voting machines in key swing states to try to 're-run' the election." It’s these guys’ texts from the runup to Jan. 6 that are now missing. Rep. Bennie Thompson, the Democratic chair of the Jan. 6 committee, said in a written statement, “It is extremely troubling that the issue of deleted text messages related to the January 6 attack on the Capitol is not limited to the Secret Service, but also includes Chad Wolf and Ken Cuccinelli, who were running DHS at the time." Steve Benen is a producer for "The Rachel Maddow Show," the editor of MaddowBlog and an MSNBC political contributor. He's also the bestselling author of "The Impostors: How Republicans Quit Governing and Seized American Politics." © 2023 NBC UNIVERSAL  To provide you with a more relevant online experience, certain online ad partners may combine personal information that we make available with data across different businesses and otherwise assist us with related advertising activities, as described in our Privacy Policy.  This may be considered "selling" or "sharing/processing” for targeted online advertising under applicable law. If you are a resident of California, Connecticut, Colorado, Utah or Virginia, to opt out of us selling or sharing/processing your personal information:
  Please note that choices related to cookies and device identifiers are specific to the brand’s website or app on the browser or device where you are making the election.  California, Connecticut, Colorado, Utah & Virginia Residents Only: To opt out of selling or sharing/processing for targeted advertising of information such as cookies and device identifiers processed for targeted ads (as defined by law) and related purposes for this site/app on this browser/device, switch this toggle to off (grey color) by moving it left and clicking “Confirm My Choice” below. (This will close this dialogue box, so please open the email Opt-Out Form 1st).  ALL OTHER LOCATIONS: If we do not detect that you are in California, Connecticut, Colorado, Utah or Virginia, this choice will not apply even if you toggle this button off.If you turn this off, you will still see ads, but they may be less relevant or based only on our first-party information about you.Please note, you must make the Manage Preference choices on each site/app on each browser/device you use to access the services. You must also renew this choice if you clear your cookies. You can change your precise geolocation permissions for our mobile apps in your mobile device settings.  To opt out of the use of your email and other personal information related to that email such as your name for targeted advertising activities please complete this Opt-Out Form Please see our Cookie Notice for more details which can be found by navigating to the Privacy Policy in the menu settings page.